## IS340 Term Paper: Flora Project
Lisa Zenku, Summer 2023

### Abstract  

Loneliness is a public health emergency. An alarming message was released by the US Surgeon General Dr. Vivek Murthy in an advisory published by the US Department of Health and Human Services in May 2023. In the advisory *New Surgeon General Advisory Raises Alarm about the Devastating Impact of the Epidemic of Loneliness and Isolation in the United States*, Dr. Murthy calls attention to the public health crisis of loneliness, isolation, and lack of connection in the United States. This gap of connections is even wider amongst the older and newer generations. A solution to this problem is creating a mentor-matching social platform to bridge the gap between generations and address a critical part of the loneliness crisis in the U.S. This platform and the process of building it will help solve this crisis by being in an environment to help grow connections, fuel conversations, and even expand knowledge. 

### Introduction

My inspiration for this project is my grandma, Floresha, who is so kind and encourages me to do my best every day. She was a preschool teacher for over 25 years and I am so grateful to be able to learn so much from her. Spending time in the garden and cooking together are some of my favorite ways to pick up skills with her. I also feel more connected to her since she lives with me and my family in our home. Something I’ve noticed is that it is increasingly common for older Americans to not live in the same house as their family. For elderly people who don’t live with their family, this social platform can be beneficial to connect with other people for their mental and physical health. The study *Trends in Loneliness Among Older Adults from 2018–2023* from the University of Michigan on elderly loneliness showed that around 75% of older adults had negative effects on their mental health and around 40% of older adults had negative effects on their physical health due to social isolation and lack of companionship from 2018-2023. Many people think that loneliness only affects your mental health, but that’s not the case. Loneliness can lead to many physical health consequences, like sleep deprivation, poor heart health, weakened immune system, headaches, stroke, and the list goes on. We need to take proactive action to help prevent elderly people from getting any damage to their physical and mental health due to loneliness.

To address the loneliness public health emergency, we need to build new social networking platforms which reward connecting and communicating among people. This open-source project will build a platform to connect the wisdom of the older generation with the need for more human interactions by the younger generation, which is getting bombarded by AI-generated content. The software development itself can be in that direction to bring together programmers of different generations, which are going to help each other with old and new ways to build this social network platform. This open-source communication platform will enable active volunteering from older people that wish to give great advice and mentor the younger generation based on their own experiences, knowledge, and wisdom that they have gained in their life. My goal for this paper is to apply what I have learned from the lectures by Dr. Bradley Alicea during his summer 2023 section of IS 340, Project Management, to my proposed open-source project called Flora.

### Purpose     

The purpose of building this mentor-matching social network platform is twofold: to create generational connections between older and younger programmers who are going to build the platform and then ultimately to continuously create these connections between different generations for ongoing mentorship. This project will be able to connect people together based on the interests, hobbies, or topics they are passionate about. When a user is building their profile, they will indicate what interests, hobbies, or topics they want to talk about, learn more about, or explore to give the best suggestions for events, volunteers, discussion that they would enjoy the most. The developers of this project will make this idea come to life by exploring any features or ideas that would improve the platform. While the developers can think of good ideas, the users of the platform I will have personal experience with using the platform and can offer innovative ideas that the developers didn’t realize. Through collaborative tools, we could create an ongoing wishlist for potential features to add to the social network platform in the future. This is where we would start collecting feedback from different user communities about features they would like to have in this mentor-matching social platform. The continuous feedback will support this platform to always improve and the capability to expand the platform to reach more people.

### Guiding Principles 

This project will utilize the guiding principles of open-source projects, which I learned in the IS 340 Project Management course. Those principles are usability, collaboration, community-driven, inclusivity, and flexibility.

The platform has a strong imperative to be easy to use and understand. It is important to note that a great deal of future users will be from a group with lesser experience in internet services such as this. Some ways to help them use this platform best would be, simple navigation, bigger font sizes, and providing a speech function to read aloud the text. A huge focus of this project will be on making a very simple and satisfying interface that is easy to maneuver and allow the users to conveniently do anything they would like to do with confidence. In this mentoring platform, we will need to pay special attention to the usability of our application for the elderly so that installing and configuring the app should be very easy for the elderly user base. Examples of ways to make the interface easier for the volunteers/ mentors are to break information into short sections, reduce the amount of confusing terminology, use single mouse clicks, and minimize scrolling. To set an expectation, it should be easier than replacing AAA batteries on a TV remote. The app should be designed with large fonts and massive buttons to help with elderly vision problems. Generally, the font size should not be smaller than 12 point size because elderly people reading smaller font sizes leads to visual fatigue. 

Another guiding principle of our project will be to continuously enable the sharing of new ideas and knowledge amongst developers and users of this mentoring platform. This platform will have people talk about the small things in everyday life to the big topics of the world. There could be a volunteer/ mentor having a one-on-one chat about gardening or a volunteer/ mentor creating an event where people can join to talk about the major topics of the world. The different possibilities for sharing wisdom and conversation with others are endless. One of the purposes of this mentoring platform is to enable wisdom to be explored and shared from the network of mentors, which is why collaborative principles are going to be a high priority. 

The open-source project principles we want to implement are to have this platform be community-driven and to have inclusivity. It needs to nurture a community of developers willing to donate their time and knowledge to build this platform and then the user community itself needs to actively share ideas on how to improve the platform. This platform will allow people to contribute in their own way to ensure the greatest amount of usefulness for the users of the platform. These communities should be inclusive and create safe spaces for generational differences to be shared without any prejudices. By making this project a safe space for others, it can lead to making deeper conversations and connections. 

The mentoring platform needs to be flexible for similar uses and offer a wide variety of matching subjects so that it is enriching the matchmaking process. The mentoring platform needs to allow users to control the profiles they create with all the rest of the user-created content. One of the features that we would start with will include a registration process that will create the user’s profile and account on the platform. When users create their accounts, the first thing they will need to do is to decide if they will be a volunteer/ mentor or a learner, somebody who seeks someone to mentor them. After the initial classification, users will fill out more information about themselves to improve the matchmaking process to identify the best possible connections. As a volunteer/ mentor, the user would fill out basic information about themselves, why they want to join this community, and any interests, hobbies, or topics they would like to talk to other people about. As a learner/ mentee, the user will be asked some basic questions about themselves and what interests, hobbies, or topics they would like to learn more about. When either type of profile selects an interest, hobby, or topic they like, two recommendations will show up based on what was selected. Every user needs to choose at least 5 different interests, hobbies, or topics in their profile to help the system give the user the best experience possible with other people with the same interests. Also, users will not be restricted to only the interests, hobbies, and topics that they chose on their profiles. They will be able to continually explore new topics and add them to their profile. As well as deciding what topics interest the user, the user will be able to block any interests, hobbies, or topics they have no interest in learning or talking about. To change your interests, hobbies, or topics that are in the users’ profile, they will go to their profile’s settings and then towards the interests, hobbies, and topics sections to add or block anything they would like to.

### Target Audience 

The target audience for building and using this platform are going to be in two large groups: the older generation that want to make new connections and share their wisdom and the younger generation that wants to learn from their wisdom and gain a mentor. Two ways the older generation can add to this platform are by helping with the development of the platform and being a volunteer/mentor to the younger generation. Additionally, the younger generation can contribute to the platform by helping with building the platform and being a learner to gain the knowledge and personal experiences of the volunteers on the platform. With the help of both generations, we will create a space that gives them the opportunity to engage in conversations with others and also to combat loneliness. As the reach of those platforms grows, we will be able to expand more of our platform to more curious people and provide similar matchmaking capabilities. 

### Agile Methodology 

There might be some difficulty for the elder volunteers trying to understand how to build the platform and so I would implement agile documentation to help guide them. One of the most important things for this documentation is that it needs to be simple and straightforward for them to understand easier. There should be as little documentation as possible with the correct information and efficient descriptions to avoid any confusion and overlap. This will become the starting point for everyone to learn about the platform and how they will use it to talk and learn with others. Especially with agile documentation, it is important to keep information in the most appropriate location, such as having a clear and distinct README file that will elaborate on the inner workings of the project. There will also be a FAQ section that would be used to answer common questions asked and questions on how to complete specific tasks. 

The software that we would use for our developing team to also incorporate agile methodologies would be GitHub and Jira software. GitHub is an obvious winner for a free online open-source repository where our developers can build. It is especially appreciated that developers can use git to upload their work and git pull the most recent updates in new branches. Branches could also be used as workspaces for our two-week sprints, allowing for a clean history for development and an easy way to revert to operating work in case there was an accidental error. I mention Jira because I believe it to be a great online resource for building projects, especially one with an agile methodology. This free software has a great storyboard that will be easy to read, showing what our development team has currently planned to work on for this sprint. A newcomer can easily drop in, see what is being worked on, and interact with our community while it is being built to have a seamless transition into the project. Tickets for errors and potential features are other great features of this free product, allowing for much more efficient building of our storyboard and sprints. 

Daily scrum meetings can be a fun inclusion to this project, allowing for more interaction from our developers, which is perfect because it gives the older developers time to chat with our community and teach us more about how they develop. Another fun project could be to create some videos during development to guide new developers in the installation process on how to get started, instead of a simple guide file. Following along to a video is much simpler and allows for new developers to get started much faster, and will allow for more involvement in the community! It is especially important to fulfill the purposes of this project even in development. 

### License 

Since this is going to be an open-source project, its license will need to allow free use and modifications to the system. After diving into multiple licenses, the best fit for this project would be the GNU General Public License v3.0. From *choosealicense.com* created by the GitHub team, this license’s biggest focus is simply on sharing improvements to the project, which is exactly what I am looking for, and disallows distributions of closed-source versions, which could lead to confusion. This project is aiming toward a community that continuously improves on the platform and allows for new features to be tested and added to the main branch. This license allows commercial, patent, and private use of the code, along with distribution and modification. The conditions require the persons to disclose the source of the code they want to use, keep the same license on the code and state the changes they made to the project. Compared to the MIT License, which allows for anything, I believe GNU provides a better focus on the goals in mind for this project. 

### Community Engagement

One of the important things about this project is making sure that the community is continuing good communication with each other that leads to better connections. Communication is key for both the users and developers of this project. To make sure there is no miscommunication or deviation to the scope of the project, keep regular tabs on the GitHub repos, community discussion boards, events communications, and other areas of the project. New developers need to be able to have a clear understanding of what the project is about, how to help, etc. to have a smooth transition by using the well-detailed and organized README file. Quarterly reports and newsletters will be used to update the community on the project and have features that highlight contributors and community members. This can help motivate the contributors and community members of the project to be more active on the project so that others can see their achievements made on the project. 

Another motivation that community members can receive are badges for their contributions and usage of the platform. The application of a discourse style of organizing community discussions can be really useful for this project. Designing the interface of the discussions can help find what the user is looking for and can notice similar or new topics that might interest them. A way to do that is to use themed buckets for the discussions to easily navigate to the topics you want to go towards and using markdown for message threads to add images and other stylistic choices to draw more people into the discussion. With these badges, it can help encourage more activity or celebrate their efforts and can give credibility to the volunteer or leaner. There can be badges for completing a certain amount of events/ discussions, being the most active during an event, doing a certain amount of hours on discussions/ events, visiting the platform for a certain amount of days sequentially, etc. There are so many different possibilities for badges on this platform. 

### Conclusion 

To make this platform as beneficial as possible, we need to make sure that anyone at any age can use this platform with certainty. This will be a safe environment for everyone to share their wisdom, ideas, and opinions about so many different topics ranging from a quick conversation about little things to discussing larger topics. Also, this platform will make sure that it can adapt to the user’s interests and can help guide them to learning about new ones. The target audience will be the older and new generations to gain new insights and point of views on many things. The GNU General Public License v3.0 will be the best first step to help make the platform as trouble-free as possible to get the best outcome. Use of agile documentation will be easy to grasp to avoid any confusion, overlap, or miscommunication for the platform. GitHub will be where the developer can create and grow the platform and Jira will help make the sprint and daily scrum meetings be facilitated without any problems. The purpose of this platform is to promote communication with the community and to gain more bonds with other people, whether that be from newsletters, community events, or badges. Flora, this innovative platform, can be immensely useful to solve the problem of loneliness in elderly people by fostering more communication between different generations to share their wisdom and ideas with each other.

### References 

“GNU General Public License v3.0.” Choose a License, 23 July 2023, www.choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/. 

“New Surgeon General Advisory Raises Alarm about the Devastating Impact of the Epidemic of Loneliness and Isolation in the United States.” HHS.Gov, 3 May 2023, www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/05/03/new-surgeon-general-advisory-raises-alarm-about-devastating-impact-epidemic-loneliness-isolation-united-states.html. 

Trends in Loneliness Among Older Adults from 2018–2023, Mar. 2023, https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/175971/0300_NPHA-Loneliness-report-FINAL-doifinal.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y 
