## IS 340 Term Paper: Girl Scout Cookie Inventory System
Stefan Chu, Summer 2023

### Abstract   

Girl Scouts is a nonprofit organization of parent volunteers and their daughters. Together, the organization builds up girls’ social and business skills. According to The Associated Press, Girl Scouts sell around 200 million boxes of cookies each year. Such a large volume of sales necessitates the use of a robust inventory system to track cookie movement between warehouses and sales. Due to the organization's status as a nonprofit run solely on donations and fundraisers such as the annual cookie sales, it has proved difficult for them to update existing systems to incorporate newer technologies due to the prohibitive cost of production and maintenance. Opening up the inventory system to the community will allow parent volunteers from across the United States to contribute to the development of the system and its applications.

### Introduction 

The project was inspired from my participation in Girl Scouts helping my mother and sister sell cookies. My mother served as the troop’s cookie chair for over seven years and cookie co-chair for the Greater Los Angeles Council in 2023. Nationally, the organization has a closed source system for managing the movement of cookies to councils across the nation. However, it wasn’t until 2016, that the Digital Cookie App was available for troops and individuals to use. The app is prone to bugs and server failures, and is slow to make updates, however, it is useful for facilitating online cookie sales through a girl’s online website accessed by email or QR code. 

On the troop and council level, cookie management is still done through spreadsheet applications such as Excel or Sheets. The system of having at least three copies of spreadsheets to cross-reference cookie sales is error prone, causing many wasted hours searching for missing boxes in the data. The system is also difficult to learn, necessitating the training of future cookie chairs years in advance.The new cookie inventory system should automate error detection and message output, autofill forms with one-click, and support multiple tables and calculated fields. These features will simplify the management of large amounts of cookies moving through troops and councils and will simplify the transfer of knowledge to future cookie chairs who need to run and maintain the system. 

### Benefits of Working Open

Working open will allow the project to leverage the expertise and knowledge of the Girl Scout parent volunteer community. After obtaining a copyleft license such as the GNU General Public License, the project can be hosted on GitHub and open to community collaboration. This has the benefits of lowering development costs. Instead of hiring third party contractors to update and maintain the inventory system, creating new features and performing maintenance on the open source inventory system will be done entirely through and by the community. There will also be more transparency compared to the current closed source system. Instead of complaining about issues that will never get fixed, an open source project will be open about its development, next steps, and timeline for tackling bugs and new features. One of the first problems that need to be solved is getting permission from the Girl Scouts organization. Their cookies and logo are copyrighted and trademarked by the organization, however I believe that they will see a benefit to the project and support its development, securing a long term partnership once the project is up and running. 

### Community Recruitment     

The community of parent volunteers in the Girl Scouts organization is a vast and untapped source of knowledge. For every girl, there are usually one or two parents behind them willing to volunteer their time and expertise. Recruitment for the open source project will be spread through Girl Scout Troops across the United States. The project will look for important stakeholders such as troop leaders and cookie chairs to get valuable feedback on the system and act as spokespeople for the project in their own troops. The project will primarily look for parent volunteers with an information science background to build up the system from scratch.

Today, there are a myriad of social networking platforms and applications to connect people together. Personally, I am the most familiar with managing a Discord server, and a community Discord will be great for hosting discussions, meetings, and even more casual threads to get to know each other better. Additionally, Discord allows the automation of many features through the use of bots, which is useful for initiating new members into the community. There is plenty of motivation for volunteers to want to help out on this project because everyone who is there wants their daughter to succeed. Because a girl is in the organization from the ages of 5 to 18, the project can expect around 5 to 10 years of involvement from a volunteer before their daughter ages out. It is not uncommon though for volunteers to stay longer due to having multiple daughters or wanting to continue helping out in their troop or on the project.

### Sustainability
  
The project will be sustained through the introduction of new features. The first iteration of the project will only incorporate the bare essentials of a cookie inventory system, resembling many SQL based systems out there. However, each year will see the project focus on new features such as incorporating new payment methods such as Apple Pay and Venmo, improving the graphical user interface, and lower priority features such as tracking rewards that include things like plush toys and theme park tickets. 

the Girl Scout cookie season runs from January to April, it is possible for the project to have an annual roadmap to plan development and launch of new features before each new cookie season. Annual Hackathons, Docathons, and Ideathons will also be beneficial for planning periods of consistent development and tackling bugs, and also periods of sprints to launch new features in time. Documenting the project will be incredibly important for the lifespan of the project because new members need to learn the ins and outs of the project to maintain and contribute to it. Ideathons will mainly focus on getting feedback on the system from troop leaders and cookie chairs after the cookie season is over. This is important for seeing how the system works in practice and planning for the development of features during the next year.

### Finance and Budgeting

One of the main expenses of the project will be paying for the SQL server upkeep costs. Before the project can be launched, a method for securing consistent funds, whether that is through fundraisers or advertisements will be needed. Another option is to implement a subscription feature for the app, so that troops will pay for some of the costs to store their sales data once they go over a certain amount, or to give access to test newer beta features before they are available for free to everyone. The goal will always be to keep costs low for troops and individuals who want to use the system, while balancing the need for adequate funds to maintain and grow the system.

### Conclusion

To ensure the success of this project, it is important to always keep in mind that the motivation for the project is to help one’s girls succeed. The project goal is to open up the closed source inventory system that the organization uses to community based development ensuring that features are up to date with the latest technologies and to ease the burden on those in admin and leadership positions who need to manage the large amounts of cookie sales each year. Going forward, building a network of Girl Scout parents will be beneficial beyond just this project, creating a community that will support each other and open up opportunities to collaborate on other projects and become lifelong friends.

### References     

The Associated Press. “The Girl Scouts Have Unsold Cookies Left. 15 Million Boxes!” NPR, 14 June 2021, www.npr.org/2021/06/14/1006373856/the-girl-scouts-have-unsold-cookies-left-15-million-boxes. 
